Blog post about upstream contributions system (#415)
2i2c-org/2i2c-brochure: content/blog/2025/upstream-impact-strategy/index.md

By intentionally setting out our goals for upstream engagement, our stakeholder communities can hold us accountable if we're taking actions that are either contrary to, or out of scope of, our goals. Here is our current thinking:

## 2i2c's Long Term Goal for upstream engagement

With this in mind, we've chosen to use the following *outcomes*, which represent our major goals for upstream contribution:

> We want the Jupyter[^0] community to be a *multi-stakeholder*[^1], *diverse*[^2] community with very high [*bus factor*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bus_factor), because we believe this is a critical pre-requisite for advancing [our mission and value proposition](https://compass.2i2c.org/organization/mission/).

> [^0]: With a current focus on the JupyterHub subcommunity, but generally applicable to any open source community we have a strategic interest in. (TODO: Understand if myst / jb should be here)

Reviewer: if myst/jb is not considered a 2i2c project, then you should certainly list it. imo

Author: JB is in an exploration phase. We've tried to [actively incorporate JB support into our service](https://2i2c.org/blog/2025/jb-for-communities/) over this year by offering it for communities, and have as a result been investing a lot of our team's time and energy into development and community support, but are still working out how to best incorporate it into our overall strategy. I'll add a note about that!

[^2]: Across the power spectrum - from users to bug reporters to casual contributors to maintainers to people on governance duty

We want to build team processes that help upstream communities make progress towards this goal, so everyone can (and does) equitably participate in upstream communities with the support they need. 

## Our current objectives to accomplish this goal

This is a long ranging goal, and we've adopted the following more focused objectives to have something more concrete we can work towards. We're focusing on the JupyterHub community for now, and are exploring how to adapt this for other upstream communities we participate in:

1. **Objective 1**: Increase the amount of casual but returning contributors to the JupyterHub community
2. **Objective 2**: Increase the amount of total maintainers in the JupyterHub community

We've chosen these two objectives because we believe we can meaningfully make progress on both of them, and do so by equitably changing our internal processes so 2i2c staff can meaningfully contribute within their work hours towards these goals.

## Activities that feed into these objectives

> We'd like to experiment with the following 4 activities, along with associated KPIs, to try out for the next 6-9 months. 

Reviewer: Since you mention 4 here, I would find it useful if the list were enumerated. (I suppose it's the 4 next level headings, but it's really difficult to see that especially as the 3rd and 4th heading level is almost the same size)

Author: I've added a list of header links just below so it's clearer

Which experience will encourage you to come back and contribute again?

It's clearly (1). So we should try to use our institutional capacity to bring the community closer to (1).

We'll accomplish this by including the following work item in every sprint:

> **Review of N PRs by non-maintainers of JupyterHub**

We will build skills (via pairing, training, etc) inside the organization to be able to do this, as not everyone will feel comfortable reviewing pull requests for all projects nor have rights to actually merge or close PRs. We may also do additional work that helps drive this activity forward, such as new contributor drives, better documentation, and policy advocacy. We will strive to make sure this includes pull requests of all types, not just code contributions. 

#### KPIs

Two KPIs shall be measured for this activity:

1. Number of PRs merged (or closed) through our sprint planning activity.
2. Number of *returning* contributors whose PRs were reviewed by us.

### Issue Triage office hours

> Issue Triage is hard for newcomers to do, as often it requires deep knowledge of various components to understand how to direct an issue or refine it. As part of our sprints, we will run regular (cadence TBD, but no less frequently than monthly) "Issue Triage" office hours focused on triaging new issues that come up. To start with, this will be focused on serving _other members of the 2i2c Team_, with a focus on upskilling them. We'll then explore how we can open these sessions up to the broader upstream community.

Reviewer: Issue triage where? This is a bit confusing as you also mention it's to serve other 2i2c members: triage issues that they opened upstream, or teach them how to triage upstream or 🤷‍♀️ 

Overall I think this needs some clarification

Author: I've added a bit more clarification here

#### KPIs

> 1. Number of issues triaged by 2i2c team members

Reviewer: What do you mean my this metric, when is an issue can be classified as "triaged"? You run the code snippet and it's still a bug; you triaged and it turns out to be resolved already; you opened a quick PR to fix it? 

Where do you draw the line for something to count here?

(I used to random triage a lot using an offering of 10 random issues a day -- I would not say I triaged 10 though -- so this is a genuine question)

Author: I think that this is in the realm of "_shrug_ we are still figuring all of these out" - to reiterate a point above, these are just general ideas for where we can have the most impact but they are still quite uncertain, we're throwing this out here as a starting point.

I'll add your point here, I think it's good - to me, we'd want some definition of "issue quality" and say that triage ensures that an issue makes it closer to that definition in a measurable way.

### Sponsoring and Mentoring new Maintainers

Beyond just contributions, OSS communities must also grow their _contributors_ into a pool of _maintainers_, or they will die. 

{{< figure src="https://imgs.xkcd.com/comics/dependency.png" alt="XKCD comic about dependency" link="https://xkcd.com/2347/" caption="XKCD comic about dependency" >}}

But growing new maintainers takes time and effort. Not just on behalf of the person who is trying to be the maintainer, but on existing maintainers who have to spend time mentoring and sponsoring this person. The focus on sponsorship is very imporant, for excellent reasons [laid out by Lara Hogan](https://larahogan.me/blog/what-sponsorship-looks-like/). This work also takes a long time to manifest - closer to a year than a month.

> We shall build structures to identify potential maintainers, and build long term pathways for them to do work in the community to gain maintainership status. Given JupyterHub doesn't have an explicit 'how to become a maintainer' pathway, we shall instead focus on:

Reviewer: This is nitpicking, but I don't clearly see what "instead" refers to here; instead of what?
Maybe rephrase to something like 
```suggestion
We shall build structures to identify potential maintainers, and build long term pathways for them to do work in the community to gain maintainership status. As JupyterHub doesn't have an explicit 'how to become a maintainer' pathway we could just follow, we will build our own process via these focus areas:
```

---
title: "From scattered effort to strategic impact: How we're systematizing our Foundational open source contributions"
date: 2025-09-20
authors:
  - Yuvi Panda
tags:
  - open source
categories:
  - impact
---

> Over the past few months we've been running an experiment to be more thoughtful about our goals, strategy, and systems for supporting upstream communities _as a team_. This is a summary of the major ideas behind our current plan. It includes a few team targets and practices that we'll pilot over the next year. We'll revisit this as we learn more. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Over the past year we've been running an experiment to be more thoughtful about our goals, strategy, and systems for supporting upstream communities _as a team_. This is a summary of the major ideas behind our current plan. It includes a few team targets and practices that we'll pilot over the next year. We'll revisit this as we learn more. 
```

Reviewer 2: Been a while haha

We'll begin by using this to upskill our _own 2i2c team members_ in more effectively triaging issues, and learn how to most-effectively do this. We'll then use our learning to explore how we can open up issue triage sessions to the broader upstream community so that others can learn as well.

#### KPIs

1. Number of issues triaged by 2i2c team members.[^triage]

[^triage]: This requires a definition of "an issue that has been triaged", and to our knowledge no such definition exists. We'd like to learn how to measure something abstract like "issue triage" - perhaps it is something specific putting it on a board for further action or applying a label, or something more abstract like "increasing how clear and actionable the issue is". We'll explore this when we start to make progress towards this objective.

### Sponsoring and Mentoring new Maintainers {#mentoring-maintainers}

Beyond just contributions, OSS communities must also grow their _contributors_ into a pool of _maintainers_, or they will die. 

{{< figure src="https://imgs.xkcd.com/comics/dependency.png" alt="XKCD comic about dependency" link="https://xkcd.com/2347/" caption="XKCD comic about dependency" >}}

> But growing new maintainers takes time and effort. Not just on behalf of the person who is trying to be the maintainer, but on existing maintainers who have to spend time mentoring and sponsoring this person. The focus on sponsorship is very important, for excellent reasons [laid out by Lara Hogan](https://larahogan.me/blog/what-sponsorship-looks-like/). This work also takes a long time to manifest - closer to a year than a month.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But growing new maintainers takes time and effort. Not just on behalf of the person who is trying to be the maintainer, but on existing maintainers who have to spend time mentoring and sponsoring this person. The focus on sponsorship is very important, for excellent reasons [laid out by Lara Hogan](https://larahogan.me/blog/what-sponsorship-looks-like/). This work also takes a long time to manifest - closer to years than months.
```
